# KIP-81: Councilors

## Concept 


Just like in the case of validators query, we need to have the ability to discover all governance members (Councilors) as well as their corresponding permissions, statuses & basic info taken directly from the Identity Registrar. Any KIRA account that has at least one **whitelisted** Permission or Role[broken link] (allowing them to create proposals or vote) should be considered a Councilor. If account has NO Permissions/Roles (allowing them to create proposals or vote) or all their Permission/Roles are **blacklisted**, then such account MUST NOT be considered a Councilor. For example a validator with permission to claim the Validator Seat might NOT be a Councilor if they do NOT have any permission that allows them to vote or create proposals.


_NOTE: Having permissions or role does NOT automatically imply being a councilor.  Councilors are ONLY governance members who can collude to raise proposals or vote on said proposals. SUDO user (user with permission to assign permissions) is NOT a councilor in this context._  


## Implementation 


### I. Claiming Councilor Seat 

Before any governance member should be allowed to execute their right to create proposals or vote, they should first “claim” their Councilor Seat, in similar manner to how Validators claim their validator seat. This action will be considered an acknowledgement of the network Code of Conduct[broken link] as well as allow us to register KIRA user in the governance registrar. When submitting a `claimCouncilSeatTx` user should supply following information, which will be persisted in the Identity Registrar[broken link]:

- `username` - (required), friendly gov member name, MUST be globally unique (just like moniker)
	- _It should NOT be possible to remove_ _`moniker`_ _or_ _`username`_ _from globally reserved unique Identity Registrar entries even through governance process_
	- Enforce for both `moniker` and `username` to have minimum `4` characters (non whitespace)
	- Enforce that once set it should NOT be possible to delete or wipe  `moniker` and `username`
- `description` - (optional), a longer description of the councilor
- `social` - (optional), comma-separated URL list of any social profiles such as Twitter, Telegram, etc…
- `contact` -  (optional), email address, url, or another emergency contact
- `avatar` - (optional), URL to .SVG image or gif

It should only be allowed to send `claimCouncilSeatTx` if the status of the Councilor is `waiting`


### Ii. Councilor Statuses 

Just like in case of Validators, Councilors MUST have a status that will imply their ability to perform their role of creating proposals and voting.

- `active` - Default state after sending `claimCouncilSeatTx`. Implies councilor ability to vote and create proposals.
- `waiting` - Default state after permission to vote or propose is assigned to the KIRA account. This state MUST only appears once. Once changed it should NEVER be possible for this status to reappear.
- `inactive` - Councilor stopped voting on proposals and didn’t signal to the network any planned absence. As defined by the Ranking System (see section III.).
- `paused` - Councillor signaled planned absence.
- `jailed` - Councilor is barred from executing any of his permissions (not just voting).

### Iii. Ranking System 


Similarly to Validators ranks, the Councilor ranking will be used to apply changes to statuses and collect statistics that can be utilized by the governance to determine which network actors fulfill their assigned roles.  


_NOTE: The ranking of Councilors and Validators will be totally independent and will have separate logic. In case of voting on governance proposals there is no uncertainty whether or not vote happened from the fault of the person who was supposed to submit it, thus there is no need for mischance calculations._


The ranking system is based on proposal creation and proposal votes counters. If the Councilor participates in voting or creates the proposal, then his `rank` is **increases** by `1` and the `abstention counter` set to `0`. If the Councilor fails to vote, we will **decrease** his rank by `abstention_rank_decrease_amount` (that must be defined in Network Properties[broken link]), as well as increase by `1` the `abstention counter`. Note here that rank should be always a positive integer, minimum rank MUST be `0` and can NOT be negative.


If the `abstention counter` reaches value equal or greater than `max_abstention` (that must be defined in Network Properties[broken link]), then the Councilor status MUST change to `inactive`. While in the `inactive` state, Councilor should NOT have the ability to vote and create proposals while his `rank` should be reset to `0` (`abstention counter` MUST **NOT** be reset). Only way for the councilor to be able to vote again is to submit `councilorActivateTx`, that MUST result in `abstention counter` being reset to `0` (otherwise status would again change to `inactive`).


To prevent status from becoming `inactive` while absent for prolonged periods of time, the Councilors MUST be able to submit a  `councilorPauseTx`, as result of which the status MUST change to `paused`. In the `paused` state the abstention counter should NOT change and the `rank` should NOT be reset while the Councilor should NOT be able to vote or create propose. To exit the `paused` status Councilor should submit the `councilorUnPauseTx`, while the `abstention counter` MUST **NOT** be reset as the result. 


Finals case where `rank` should be reset to `0` is when status of the Councilor changes to `jailed`. The `jailed` status should be activated in the case where Councilor is also a Validator and the Validator status changes to `jailed`. In the jailed status it should NOT be possible to vote and create proposals unless Validator is unjailed by governance, in case of which the Councilor status should change to `inactive`.


### Ranking Logic Summary 

- Governance member who claimed Counselor seat voted on proposal or created a new proposal while having `active` status
	- increase `rank` by `1`
	- set `abstention counter` to `0`
- Counselor did NOT voted on the proposal he had permission to vote on while having `active` status
	- decrease rank by `abstention_rank_decrease_amount`
	- increase `abstention counter` by `1`
- Counselor **consecutively** did NOT voted on the proposal he had permission to vote more than `max_abstention` number of times while having `active` status
	- change status to `inactive`
	- set `rank` to `0`
- Counselor sent `councilorActivateTx` while having `inactive` status
	- set `abstention counter` to `0`
- Counselor status changes to `jailed`
	- set `rank` to `0`

### Iv. Ranking Reset 


It might be useful for the governance to have ability to reset all ranks and abstention counters of all governance members simultaneously (e.g. incentivized games etc.). For this purpose we should create a dedicated proposal and corresponding voting permission.


## Transactions & Queries  


List of essential transactions & queries

- `query-councilors` - list all councilors (waiting or not), including their corresponding statuses, ranks & abstenation counters
	- add sub-query to search by specific KIRA address
- `query-non-councilors` - list all governance members that are NOT Councilors
- `query-addresses-by-whitelisted-permission` - list all KIRA addresses by a specific whitelisted permission (address does NOT have to be a Councilor)
- `query-addresses-by-blacklisted-permission` - list all KIRA addresses by a specific blacklisted permission (address does NOT have to be a Councilor)
- `query-addresses-by-whitelisted-role` - list all kira addresses by a specific whitelisted role (address does NOT have to be a Councilor)
- `query-addresses-by-blacklisted-role` - list all kira addresses by a specific blacklisted role (address does NOT have to be a Councilor)
- `councilor-pause` - signal to the network that Councilor will NOT be present for a prolonged period of time
- `councilor-unpause` - signal to the network that Councilor wishes to regain voting ability after planned absence
- `councilor-activate` - signal to the network that Councilor wishes to regain voting ability after unannounced absence

## Note 

- If it makes things simpler we can register all governance members in the Councilors data structure by giving them status `undefined`
